@node PVS 4.2 Release Notes
@unnumbered PVS 4.2 Release Notes

PVS 4.2 is primarily a bug fix release; there are few new features.
Some of the changes do affect proofs, though our experience is that
only a few proofs need adjustment, and most of these are quite easy
to recognize and fix.

@ifnottex
@menu
* 4.2 Installation Notes::
* 4.2 Changes::
* 4.2 Incompatibilities::
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@node    4.2 Installation Notes
@section Installation Notes

The system is installed as usual; see the download pages at
@example
@url{http://pvs.csl.sri.com/download.shtml}
@end example
We strongly suggest getting a pre-built Allegro version, unless you have
concerns with the Allegro runtime click-though license, in which case get
the pre-built CMU Lisp image.


@node    4.2 Changes
@section Changes

@itemize @minus

@item
The prelude has been modified. First, the definition of @code{the} has
been removed.  This is to keep automatic rewrites from expanding
@code{the} to epsilon, which is generally not useful.  Proofs that used
this will need to be modified, usually by bringing in the @code{the_lem}
lemma.  In addition, a number of new lemmas have been added.  Here is the
complete list of changes:
@itemize @bullet
@item
From theory @code{sets}:
@example
  the(p: (singleton?)): (p)

  the_lem: LEMMA FORALL (p: (singleton?)): the(p) = epsilon(p)

  the_prop: LEMMA FORALL (p: (singleton?)): p(the(p))

  is_singleton: LEMMA
    FORALL a: (nonempty?(a) AND
               FORALL x, y: a(x) AND a(y) IMPLIES (x=y))
      IMPLIES singleton?(a)

  singleton_elt_lem: LEMMA
     singleton?(a) and a(x) IMPLIES singleton_elt(a) = x

  singleton_elt_def: LEMMA
     singleton?(a) IMPLIES singleton_elt(a) = choose(a)

  singleton_rew: LEMMA singleton_elt(singleton(x)) = x

  AUTO_REWRITE+ singleton_rew
@end example
@item
From theory @code{list_props}:
@example
  every_nth: LEMMA
      every(P)(l) IFF FORALL (i:below(length(l))): P(nth(l,i))
@end example      
@item
From theory @code{more_map_props}:
@example
  map_nth_rw: LEMMA
    FORALL (i: below(length(l))):
      nth(map(f)(l), i) = f(nth(l, i))
@end example
@end itemize

@item
C@'esar Mu@~noz has provided improvements for pvsio.  See
@code{doc/PVSio-2.d.pdf} for details.

@item
Judgements over dependent types have been fixed - in most cases this
meant the judgement was not used where it should have been, in a couple of
cases it left free variables uninstantiated, causing breaks.

@item
Recursive judgements were recently introduced (see the 4.1 release notes),
and several bugs have been fixed.  In addition, now when recursive
judgement has a name, the corresponding formula is generated as an axiom.

@item
Auto-rewrites now find the proper instances; prior to this, the
auto-rewrites were kept in generic form, and never properly instantiated.

@item
Theory interpretations have had a number of bugs fixed.

@item
TCC subsumption tests have been improved, leading to fewer TCCs.

@item
Batch mode now saves the context; before this, Emacs was exiting without
giving lisp a chance to save.

@item
Libraries are more robust; in particular, relative library paths now work
properly when used recursively.
@end itemize

@node    4.2 Incompatibilities
@section Incompatibilities

The changes lead to some incompatibilities.  The improved judgements and
TCC subsumption lead to fewer TCCs, hence may cause TCC renumbering and
proofs may have to be shifted (@code{M-x show-orphaned-proofs} may be
useful here).

In addition to these, the improved auto-rewrites also affect proofs, as
some branches of a proof may no longer be generated, or may have a
different form.  It is usually easy to repair, though it often helps to
run an older version of PVS in parallel to figure out where the proof
deviates.  Finally, any proof that relies on the expansion of @code{the}
will need to use @code{the_lem} instead.
