@node PVS 7.1 Release Notes
@unnumbered PVS 7.1 Release Notes

PVS 7.1 introduces several new features and bug fixes.  Some of the
highlights include an improved installation (PVS is no longer a ``tar
bomb''), the concept of workspaces, improvements to the XML-RPC interface,
some language changes, an improved tracking for TCC changes, improvements
to strategy definitions, improvements to theory interpretations, and
inclusion of Yices.  There are many other changes not mentioned here; it
is worth skimming through the rest of this chapter to see which are
useful to you.

@ifnottex
@menu
* 7.1 Installation Notes::
* 7.1 New Features::
* 7.1 Incompatibilities::
@end menu
@end ifnottex


@node    7.1 Installation Notes
@section Installation Notes

The system is most easily installed by getting a tar file from 
@url{http://pvs.csl.sri.com/download.shtml}.  Untar it in a directory of
your choice (it will create a subdirectory), cd to the subdirectory, and
run @code{sh install.sh}.  This sets the path in various scripts, so that
PVS knows where it is.  It also byte-compiles the emacs source for your
Emacs.  If you move the PVS directory, or change your Emacs, or forgot
whether you ran it already, then simply rerun it.

We strongly suggest getting a pre-built Allegro version, unless you have
concerns with the Allegro runtime click-though license, in which case get
one of the SBCL Lisp images.  It is possible to build from sources, but it
can be sensitive to the platform environment.  If you decide to try it and
run into problems, let us know at @email{pvs-bugs@@csl.sri.com}.
PVS 7.1 is built with Allegro CL 10.0 and SBCL 1.0.47.  It is available for
Linux 64-bit machines, and Mac 64-bit.

Note that the XML-RPC server is not (yet) available in SBCL.

The latest PVS includes a preliminary version of a PVS client, written in
wxPython.  To use, you will need to have Python 2.7, along with @code{wx}
(@url{http://www.wxpython.org/}), @code{pyparsing}
(@url{http://pyparsing.wikispaces.com/}), and optionally @code{jsonschema}
(@url{https://github.com/Julian/jsonschema}) and @code{requests}
(@url{http://www.wxpython.org/}).  If missing, the latter will give
warnings - these can be ignored.  These packages may often be gotten
through Linux package managers, or using easy_install or pip.

@node    7.1 New Features
@section New Features

@menu
* PVS Workspaces::
* PVS Language Changes::
* TCC Formulas and Associated Proofs::
* PVS XML-RPC server::
* GUI::
* Prover GUI::
* PVS Identifier Tooltips::
* Proof Command Definitions::
* Positive Type Parameters::
* Typepred Extension::
* TCC Ordering::
* Yices in 7.1::
* Theory Interpretations::
@end menu

@node PVS Workspaces
@subsection PVS Contexts, Workspaces, and Libraries

Up to now PVS has had two notions of context, one which relates to
directories (called a @emph{PVS context}), and the other the usual list of
declarations of type theory.  The former are now referred to as
workspaces, which are just directories with some sort of PVS file in them.

As with directories in a shell, there is a current workspace; other
workspaces may be referenced as libraries.  Within PVS names, the library
is referred to by an identifier, and this is resolved to a workspace in
one of three ways, in order:
@itemize @bullet
@item
there is a visible library declaration with the given id.  Note that this
only makes sense in a declaration context, e.g., when typechecking,
proving, etc.
@item
the id is a subdirectory of the current workspace.
@item
the id appears as a subdirectory in one of the directories of the
@code{PVS_LIBRARY_PATH} environment variable.
@end itemize
Note that the second resolution is sensitive to what the current workspace
is; in previous PVS versions this was implemented in such a way that the
current workspace was treated in a special way, and changing workspaces
meant ``throwing away'' much of the typechecking, etc. results.

In PVS 7, the information associated with a workspace has been
encapsulated.  This means that the current workspace is not so important.
It's more like the way a shell uses directories; even if you're in a
directory, you can run commands on files in other directories, simply by
giving a (relative or absolute) pathname.  In the same way, you can now
typecheck a file from any workspace, even if it has never been seen by PVS
before.  It temporarily becomes the current workspace, the command is run,
and then the current workspace is restored.

PVS can continue to be used exactly as in earlier versions, but there are
several advantages to this change:
@itemize @bullet
@item
Speed: in the past, library theories were treated specially, because
references might be relative.  Special class instances were created, and
changing workspaces meant clearing out typechecked forms, even when they
were needed from the new workspace.  In PVS 7, changing the current
workspace has no such effect; all the work done in the previous workspace
will be preserved.
@item
Convenience: there is no need to change context to typecheck, prove,
etc. a PVS spec.  These commands now allow the inclusion of a workspace
path, and that workspace is temporarily made the current context.
@end itemize

@subsubsection Development details

The current workspace is in the Lisp global @code{*workspace-session*}.
If the @code{*pvs*} Emacs buffer is not in the prover or ground-evaluator,
you can use @code{(show *workspace-session*)} to see the contents: this is
an instance of the @code{workspace-session} class, with slots
@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{path}: the path associated with this workspace.  This must be an
absolute path, as returned by the Common Lisp function @code{truename}.
@item
@code{pvs-files}: this is a hash-table with key the file name string
(without directory or the @code{.pvs} extension), and returns a list.  The
first element of the list is the file-date for when it was parsed, and the
rest of the list is the theories that make up the file.
@item
@code{pvs-theories}: this is a hash-table with key the theory id (symbol),
and simply returns the theory instance.
@item
@code{prelude-libs}: this is a list of the prelude extensions allowed by
PVS.  See @code{load-prelude-library} for details.
@item
@code{prelude-context}: this is a context used when prelude-libs is set,
as a starting context for typechecking new theories.
@item
@code{lisp-files}: workspaces may have a @code{pvs-lib.lisp} file, that is
automatically loaded when the workspace is referenced as a library.
@item
@code{subdir-alist}: this is a list of subdirs that may be used as library
references from this workspace.  Such subdirs must satisfy the rules for a
PVS identifier, in particular, names with hyphens are not directly allowed
(though a library declaration may reference them).
@item
@code{pvs-context}: this is a list that represents the @code{.pvscontext}
file.
@item
@code{pvs-context-changed}: this is a flag indicating that the
@code{.pvscontext} has changed, and it will be written at some point.
@item
@code{strat-file-dates}: this is a list of dates associated with the
@code{pvs-strategies} files, first from the PVS directory, then from the
user's home directory, and finally from the current workspace.
@item
@code{all-subst-mod-params-caches}: this is a cache used by
the @code{subst-mod-params} function, and not interesting unless debugging
that function.
@end itemize
Note that all of these slots were global variables in earlier versions of
PVS; this is what is meant by @emph{encapsulation}.

When PVS is started, it creates a workspace-session instance in
@code{*workspace-session*}, reads the @code{.pvscontext} file, if it
exists, and adds the workspace-session to the
@code{*all-workspace-sessions*} list.  When a file is parsed or
typechecked in that workspace, the @code{pvs-files} and
@code{pvs-theories} are updated accordingly.

To parse, typecheck, etc. a PVS file from a different directory, the
macros @code{with-workspace} or @code{with-pvs-file} are used to
temporarily change to the new workspace.  If the associated
workspace-session is already in @code{*all-workspace-sessions*} (based on
the @code{path}), then it is simply used, otherwise a new one is created
and added to @code{*all-workspace-sessions*}.

@defmac with-workspace path &rest forms
simply takes a @emph{path} (string or
pathname), and temporarily makes that the current workspace and processes
the @emph{forms} returning the value of the last one.
@end defmac

@defmac with-pvs-file vars pvsfileref body
takes a @emph{pvsfileref}, which in general has the form
@code{dir/file.pvs#theory}, though it can be as simple as a name.  It is
pulled apart, and if a @emph{dir} is included, @code{with-workspace} is
used, and the rest is split on the @code{#}, if it exists.  @emph{vars} is
a list of names, and these are bound in order with the file, theory, and
any others if they are provided (the idea is that there could be a
@code{#formula} or @code{#place} following the @code{#theory}).  The
@emph{body} is then executed with the names in @emph{vars} bound
accordingly.  Note that one must be careful here; if @emph{pvsfileref} is
just a name, it may be referring to a file or a theory, depending on the
context.  Hence there is code such as that for @code{show-tccs}:
@example
(defun show-tccs (theoryref &optional arg)
  (with-pvs-file (fname thname) theoryref
    (let* ((theory (get-typechecked-theory (or thname fname)))
           ...))))
@end example
Here a theory is expected, and if the @code{theoryref} is just a name,
then @code{fname} is set to it, and @code{thname} is @code{nil}.  This is
why the @code{theory} is derived from @code{(or thname fname)}.
@end defmac

@node PVS Language Changes
@subsection PVS Language Changes
@itemize
@item
Prime is allowed in names, e.g., @code{x'}.  Allowed anywhere except the
first character, which must be alphabetic.
@item
(Co)Datatypes may now have ASSUMING parts and theory declarations in
addition to IMPORTINGs, which may appear interleaved in the constructor
declarations.
@item
More expression judgements are allowed.  In earlier versions, the parser
distinguished between expression judgements and the other kinds of
judgements.  This is still possible for name and number judgements, but
the typechecker is now needed in general to distinguish between
application and expression judgements.  The advantage is that it opens up
expression judgements to use most any expression, though it must be kept
in mind that the judgement mechanism uses a very simple match, in order to
keep the typechecker relatively quick.
@item
IF can be given as an application, e.g., IF(b,a,c).
@item
LAMBDA expressions may be given a result type, e.g., @code{LAMBDA (x: int)
-> int: f(x)}.  This will assign the type @code{[int -> int]} to the
LAMBDA expression, and generate a TCC on @code{f(x)} if necessary.
@item
Binary relations may be chained, e.g., @code{a < b /= c > 4}.  Internally,
this becomes @code{a < b & b /= c & c > 4}.  Works for any binary relation
between the same or different types.  Note that this will not go inside
parentheses, so @code{(a < b) /= c > 4} will be interpreted as @code{(a <
b) /= c & c > 4}, which probably doesn't typecheck.  (Overloading of
relations or enabling some conversions may allow this to still be typechecked).

@end itemize

@node TCC Formulas and Associated Proofs
@subsection TCC Formulas and Associated Proofs

TCCs are generated during typechecking for a given declaration, and during
a proof for a given branch.  During typechecking, the name of a given TCC
is derived from the declaration, followed by a number; e.g., if the
declaration is named @code{foo}, then the TCCs will be named
@code{foo_TCC1}, etc.  Some declarations have many TCCs, with nontrivial
proofs.  When such a declaration is modified, it can generate insert,
remove, or otherwise renumber the TCCs, and then associate the wrong
proofs to them.

The new approach keeps track of where the proof came from, creating a
@code{tcc-origin} instance, with the following slots:
@itemize
@item @code{root}: the root name for the TCC, before the ``_TCC#''.
@item @code{kind}: one of @code{termination-subtype}, @code{subtype},
@code{termination}, @code{well-founded}, @code{existence},
@code{assuming}, @code{mapped-definition-equality}, @code{mapped-axiom},
@code{cases}, @code{actuals}, @code{disjointness}, or @code{coverage}.
@item @code{expr}: except for the @code{existence} TCCs, the expanded form
of the expression that was the reason for the TCC.
@item @code{type}: the type associated; e.g., for @code{subtype} TCCs, the
expected type.
@end itemize

The @code{.prf} file has been extended to include the same information
with TCC proofs.  When a PVS file is typechecked, the proofs are read from
the corresponding @code{.prf}.  TCC proofs are no longer matched by TCC
name, but instead the @code{kind} and @code{expr} are used.  Those that
match exactly are directly used, any remaining proofs are installed (in
order) in the remaining TCCs.  This is obviously not perfect, as the
corresponding @code{expr}s may not match, depending on the changes made to
a declaration.

@node PVS XML-RPC server
@subsection PVS XML-RPC server
@subsubsection Introduction

The PVS GUI is an API for the Prototype Verification System (PVS).
In the past, the PVS GUI was based on a modified version of the Emacs
Inferior Lisp Mode (@url{http://ilisp.cons.org/}) interface.  This
generally works well, but there are some issues:
@itemize @bullet
@item
Many new users of PVS are inexperienced not only in formal methods, but
also in the use of Emacs, which has a steep learning curve
@item
Many new users have only been exposed to mouse-and-menu interfaces, such
as Eclipse
@item
ILISP is no longer maintained, and has largely been replaced by Slime
@item
The interface to ILISP is not very flexible, making it difficult to
extend with new features
@end itemize

For these reasons, we decided to create a new API for a PVS GUI.  We have
several constraints we want to satisfy:
@itemize @bullet
@item
PVS should act as a server, with potentially many clients
@item
The interface should be "RESTful", in the same way the internet is,
i.e., there are no heartbeats, simply requests that are answered by PVS
@item
There should be no restriction on the language used to implement a
client
@end itemize

We started to create an Eclipse plugin for PVS, but found this to be
difficult; there is really nothing in Eclipse to support things like proof
windows, or the various popup buffers that PVS normally does through
Emacs.  Note that there is an @code{eclipse} subdirectory in the PVS Git
sources, for anyone who wants to continue this work.

But we took a step back, and started fresh with wxPython, which so far has
proved more flexible, and quicker for prototyping.

The basic architecture consists of a PVS server, with any number of
clients.  A client can make a request to the PVS URI, and PVS will return
a response to that client.  In addition, a client can start an XML-RPC
server and include that URI with the request, which allows PVS to send
requests to the client, e.g., to answer questions, provide file names, or
simply get notifications.

In the long run, we expect to make Emacs an XML-RPC client as well, but
for now, it uses the same ILISP interface.  However, as each JSON method
is defined (often based on the corresponding Emacs command), the same
JSON will be returned to Emacs.  This allows testing at the Emacs level,
and provides an incremental way to move toward making Emacs an XML-RPC
client.

Although PVS allows any number of clients, there is currently only one
main PVS thread.  This means that all clients would share the same proof
session, etc.  This may be useful for collaboration, or for switching
between clients (i.e., different GUIs that provide different features).
In the future we will explore the possibility of having separate threads
associated with different clients, allowing different clients to
simultaneously run different proofs, possibly in different contexts. 

PVS provides an XML-RPC server when started with a @code{-port} value,
e.g., @code{pvs -port 22334}, normally an unused port between 1024 and 65535.
XML-RPC was chosen because it is supported by most modern languages, and
we chose to implement the JSON-RPC 2.0 protocol within XML-RPC.  Directly
using JSON-RPC is possible, but it is not yet widely supported.

There is a single XML-RPC method provided by the PVS server,
@code{pvs.request}, that takes a JSON-RPC request string, and an optional
client URI, which is used to send requests to the client, providing a
2-way communication.  Note that PVS does not keep the client URI after
answering the request, thus clients may be killed and restarted at any
time.  In like manner, PVS can be restarted without needing
to restart any clients, though it may be necessary to change context,
retypecheck, etc.  At the XML-RPC level, the return value includes the
JSON-RPC response, the current PVS context, and the mode (@code{lisp},
@code{prover}, or @code{evaluator}).  Thus if a given client has changed
the context and started a proof, that information is included in the next
request from a different client.

We chose JSON as the data interchange format over XML since it is more
compact, and supported by most languages.  In addition, there is a JSON
Schema available, which we use to describe the API.

Error handling is done as follows.  When an XML-RPC request comes in, PVS
sets up a condition handler to catch any errors that may happen as a
result of processing the request.  If the request is badly formed, for
a nonexistent method, or if the JSON-RPC request does not include an id,
then a response is returned of the form  
@verbatim
{"xmlrpc-error": string, "mode": string, "context": string}
@end verbatim
If the request is well formed and includes an id, the method is invoked
under a new condition handler, and the normal JSON-RPC response is given.
This means that errors are returned even if the JSON-RPC request is a
notification (without an id).  Of course, the client is free to ignore
such errors.

@subsubsection PVS JSON-RPC methods

There are only a few methods currently supported by PVS; a lot of effort
was needed to implement the infrastructure.  In particular, the prover was
not really designed for a different API, and it was necessary to create
hooks for generating a JSON representation of the current goal of a given
proof.

The methods currently supported are listed below.  Note that details about
the possible return values are in the JSON Schema provided with PVS.

@deffn method  list-methods
This method simply lists the currently available methods.
@end deffn

@deffn method  list-client-methods
As described above, PVS may provide information or make requests to the
client.  This method lists all the JSON-RPC requests that PVS will invoke
if it is given a URI at the XML-RPC level.  Currently it consists of
@code{info}, @code{warning}, @code{debug}, @code{buffer}, @code{yes-no},
and @code{dialog}.  The JSON Schema gives details about the format.
@end deffn

@deffn method  help
Gives help for any given method returned by @code{list-methods}.
@end deffn

@deffn method  lisp
Simply sends a string to be evaluated by the PVS lisp interpreter, and
returns a string with the result.  Certainly an aid to debugging, but may
also be useful for other purposes.
@end deffn

@deffn method  change-context
Changes the current context as with the Emacs @code{change-context} command.
@end deffn

@deffn method  typecheck
Typechecks a specified file.  This returns a list of theories, each of
which includes the declarations of that theory, as well as their
locations.
@end deffn

@deffn method  names-info
This is a new method; given a PVS file, it returns an array of PVS
identifiers, their location, the associated declaration (as a string), and
the file and location where the declaration can be found.  This can be
used by the client to provide information about a given identifier when
the mouse is hovering over that identifier.  Clicking on that identifier
could bring up the corresponding file and location.
@end deffn

@deffn method  reset
This interrupts any running process, and resets the system to the state
where no proof or ground evaluator sessions are running.  This may not
clear up low-level server/client problems, as those are on a separate
thread and more difficult to reset.  We're waiting for a situation where
this is an issue.
@end deffn

@deffn method  prove-formula
Given a formula and a theory name, this starts an interactive proof.  The
result is the current goal consisting of a sequent and other fields, 
see the JSON schema for details.
@end deffn

@deffn method  proof-command
This sends the specified proof command to PVS, returning the current goal.
Currently the proof needs to be started with @code{prove-formula}, though in
principle any client (e.g., Emacs) could start the proof and a different
client continue.  It's possible for this to allow collaboration on a
single proof.
@end deffn

@node GUI
@subsection GUI

As described above, the new GUI is built on wxPython.  The executable is
@code{pvs-gui} in the top level PVS directory.  Starting it with no
arguments creates a client with port 22335, and expects the PVS server to
be at port 22334.  Currently you have to start up both, but they can be
started in either order, and if one crashes it can be restarted without
directly affecting the other.  For starting pvs include @code{-port 22334}
with any other arguments you might want.  In principle, pvs can be started
with -raw, meaning no Emacs, but it is easier for debugging to have the
Emacs ILISP interface available.  Run @code{pvs-gui -h} for details on how
to set the ports and debug levels.

The GUI configuration by default is in the file
@code{PVS/python/src/pvside.cfg}, where @code{PVS} is the pvs installation
directory.  At startup, this file is read, then the @code{~/pvside.cfg}
file is read, if it exists.  This has the same syntax as the default
file (with sections and attributes), 
but should include only those sections and attributes that you wish to
overwrite.  This includes things like the default ports, fonts, colors, etc.

Once started, it should be fairly easy to explore and find files, change
context, typecheck, and start proofs.  There is a Help menu that gives
more details.  This is very much an early prototype, and suggestions are
welcome.  Note that the sources are available on GitHub with the rest of
PVS in the python subdirectory.  Please let us know if you would like to
get involved in development of the GUI.

@node Prover GUI
@subsection Prover Emacs UI

The prover has been significantly modified to generate structures suitable
for sending to the GUI.  As a means to test this, a new capability was
added to PVS Emacs, making use of the same JSON forms as those
sent to the GUI.  By default, PVS uses the old display, simply printing
the sequent in the @code{*pvs*} buffer, displaying the @code{Rule?}
prompt, and reading the next prover command.

There are new proof displays available.  These are new, and not well
tested, please send feedback if you try them out.  Keep in mind the
distinction Emacs makes between frames, windows, and buffers.  A frame is 
what most systems call a window; each frame can be moved around on the
desktop, closed, resized, etc.  Frames may be subdivided into windows, and
each window displays a buffer.  Note that buffers are there, even if they
are not currently displayed; there are separate commands for listing
buffers, killing buffers, etc.

There are 6 proof display styles available; @code{no-frame},
@code{0-frame}, @code{1-frame}, @code{2-frame}, @code{3-frame}, and
@code{4-frame}.  As you might guess, the names say how many frames are
involved.  @code{no-frame}, the default, works as in the past.
The rest create separate windows and frames for different parts of a proof
session: the current goal, the command input, the proof commentary, and
optionally the proof script.

The @code{0-frame} uses the same frame as the PVS startup frame, and
splits it into separate windows.  The @code{1-frame} creates a new frame
for this purpose.  The @code{2-frame} puts the commentary in a separate
frame, the @code{3-frame} puts the commentary and proof script in separate
frames, and the @code{4-frame} puts all four parts in separate frames.

The commentary is used for the running commentary of a proof; information
that is part of the proof session, but not really part of a given proof
step.  The command input is currently just a window into the @code{*pvs*}
buffer, which still has the proof as before, even when displays are
active.  The sequent buffer has the feature that hovering the mouse over
an identifier shows the corresponding declaration; this can be very
helpful in proofs.

The different parts of the proof display have associated faces, and can be
customized.  Do @code{M-x customize} and search for @code{pvs} to find all
customizable faces.

@node PVS Identifier Tooltips
@subsection PVS Identifier Tooltips

A new feature of PVS, developed partly for the new GUI, is the ability to
associate tooltips with each PVS identifier of a PVS file or proof
sequent.  These tooltips are only available in typechecked files.  They
are automatically available in the GUI after typechecking; in Emacs, run
@code{M-x pvs-add-tooltips} in any typechecked buffer (including the
prelude) and then move the mouse over identifiers in the buffer to see
their types.  Clicking middle takes you to the file with the cursor at the
declaration.


@node Proof Command Definitions
@subsection Proof Command Definitions

The proof command facility has been revamped, primarily in the argument
handling.  This section is for those who write strategies.

Just to review, strategy definitions such as @code{defstep} have required,
optional, and rest arguments, e.g.,
@example
(defstep foo (a &optional b c &rest d) ...)
@end example
Invocations of @code{foo} require the first argument; if there is a second
argument it is bound to @code{b}, a third argument to @code{c}, and any
remaining arguments are bound to @code{d}.  This is similar to Common
Lisp, but in PVS the optional and rest arguments may also be given as
keywords, so @code{foo} could be invoked as either of the equivalent forms
@example
(foo 3 5 7 11 13)
(foo 3 5 :d (11 13) :c 7)
@end example

In order to add a new argument to a low-level command, (e.g., the
@code{let-reduce?} flag was added to @code{assert}), then to make this
available to other commands such as @code{grind} meant adding it and the
corresponding documentation to those commands.  This is obviously
error-prone.  Recently we wanted to add the @code{actuals?} argument of
replace to @code{grind}, in order to allow @code{grind} to work in type
and actual expressions.  The problem is that @code{grind} invokes
@code{replace*}, which has a @code{&rest fnums} argument; this does not
allow new arguments to be added without modifying existing proofs.

To solve this immediate problem we added the @code{&key} indicator.  It
is similar to the @code{&optional} indicator, but the arguments must be
provided as keywords.  Hence @code{replace*} could now be rewritten from
@example
(defstep replace* (&rest fnums) ...
@end example
to
@example
(defstep replace* (&key actuals? &rest fnums) ...
@end example
Existing proofs would not break, but new proofs could invoke
@code{replace*} with an @code{:actuals? t} argument to have
replacement happen inside of types and actuals.

But this only solves part of the problem; propagating this argument to
strategies such as @code{grind} is still error-prone.  To deal with this,
we added another indicator: @code{&inherit}.  With this, @code{replace*}
can be defined as
@example
(defstep replace* (&rest fnums &inherit replace) ...)
@end example
And now replace* automatically inherits all keyword arguments from
@code{replace}.  Not only that, but any invocations of @code{replace}
within the body of the defstep automatically include keyword invocations
of the @code{replace} call.  In effect, where the body was written simply
as @code{(replace y)}, it is replaced in the actual command by
@example
(replace y :dir dir :hide? hide? :actuals? actuals?
           :dont-delete? dont-delete?)
@end example
Note that this inherited not just the @code{actuals?} argument, but all
the others as well.  Note also that if a new argument is added to
@code{replace}, it will be automatically inherited by @code{replace*}.

@subsubsection Future Work
There is still work to be done; currently optional and key arguments allow
a default, but we want to in addition allow @code{:documentation} and
@code{:kind} keywords, even for required arguments.  The documentation
will be used to document the arguments, rather than have them in the main
documentation of the proof command.  For optional and key arguments, this
documentation will then propagate, so that, e.g., the documentation for
@code{replace*} directly explains the @code{actuals?} argument, without
having to look up @code{replace}.

The @code{:kind} will be used to support refactoring (among other
possibilities).  One problem with refactoring currently is that proofs are
kept as proof scripts, and any types, expressions, etc. are given as
strings.  Thus, for example, a command such as @code{(expand "foo")} will
resolve the name @code{foo}, and expand occurrences of it within the
current sequent.  This is the case even if @code{foo} is overloaded, and
has three definitions in the sequent.  Note that @code{foo} is resolved by
the prover, and the resolutions are used in the subsequent expansions, but
then discarded.  If now the user decides that overloaded @code{foo} is
confusing, and wants to name them apart, there is no way to know which
ones to name apart in proof scripts without rerunning them.

The @code{:kind} keyword will be used to associate a kind with each
argument, which in cases such as above would invoke functions that
generate the resolutions and cache the resolution information with the
proof, in a way that it may be used subsequently for refactoring, etc.

@subsubsection Detailed Description

The basic idea and motivation are above, the rest of this section goes
into more details for those wanting to write new strategies.

The formal arguments list for a new prover command is in a specific order:
required, optional, key, rest, and optional.  The actual syntax is
@verbatim
prover-args ::= {var}*
                [&optional {var | (var initform)}*]
                [&key {var | (var initform)}*]
                [&rest var]
                [&inherit {cmd | (cmd :except var+)}*]
@end verbatim
Required, optional, and rest arguments work exactly as detailed in the
prover guide.  Key arguments are similar to optional arguments, but may
only be specified by keyword, not by position.

The inherit argument is fundamentally different.  A proof command inherits
arguments from other proof commands.  This can only be done for proof
commands that are directly referenced in the body; for example,
@code{grind} inherits from @code{replace*}, not @code{replace}, because
it does not directly call the latter.  There are two aspects to inheriting
arguments from a command.  The first is that the command being defined
takes the union of all the arguments of its own and inherited commands.
The second, is that these inherited arguments are propagated to any calls
of inherited commands.

The inherited arguments are always either optional or key arguments; they
are always treated as key.  Hence the order of inherited arguments is not
an issue, though there is a possible issue if the names of arguments clash
with different meanings.  This can be controlled to some extent by using
the @code{:except} form, specifying the arguments to be ignored of an
inherited command.  If there are more than one unignored arguments with
the same name and different default values, the first is taken as default.
Again, this can easily be controlled, for example, if we have the forms
@example
(defstep foo (x &optional (a 3) &key (b 5) (c 7)) ...)
(defstep bar (y &optional (b 7) &key (a 11) (c 13)) ...)
(defstep baz (z &key (a 13) &inherit (foo :except c) bar) ...)
@end example
Then @code{baz} gives its own default to @code{a}, and takes @code{foo}s
default for @code{b} and @code{bar}s default for @code{c}.

Propagating the arguments to calls is relatively straightforward.  Using
the above as examples, if the body of @code{baz} has an occurrence of
@code{(bar m)}, it is simply replace by @code{(bar m :b b :a a :c c)}
and @code{(foo n)} is replaced by @code{(foo n :a a :b b)}.
Note that multiple invocations may be made to, e.g., @code{foo}, and all
of them are replaced.  Note also that, e.g., one could be as above, while
the second invocation is @code{(foo :c 31 :a 37)}, which gets expanded to
@code{(foo :c 31 :a 37 :b b)}.

The PVS Emacs command @code{M-x help-pvs-prover-strategy} (@code{C-c C-h
s}) now includes the expanded argument list and definitions, as well as
the original forms.  This can be helpful in understanding how the
prover arguments work.

This change has little impact on existing proofs, though in the regression
tests it was found that a couple of strategies defined in the NASA
libraries were not quite correct, but the old strategy mechanism simply
ignored extra arguments.  Now those generate an error.

@node Positive Type Parameters
@subsection Positive Type Parameters
PVS treats positive type parameters specially in datatypes, so that, e.g.,
@code{cons[int](1, null) = cons[nat](1, null)}, but this did not extend
beyond constructors and accessors.  Now PVS treats all definitions
accordingly.  The basic idea is that if a given definition does not depend
directly on the type, and only on the values, then it is safe to ignore
the type parameter - though typechecking may still generate a TCC.

Thus, for example, @code{length[T]((: 2, 3, 5 :))} is 3, regardless of
which numeric subtype T may be, though unprovable TCCs may result (e.g.,
if @code{T} is @code{even}).  Similarly, @code{nth} and @code{every}
depend only on the arguments, not on the types.  An example of a
definition that depends on the types, not merely the arguments, is
@example
th[T: type from int]: theory
 ...
 foo(x: T): int = if (exists (y: T): y > x) then x else 0 endif
 ...
end th
@end example

This change can have an impact on existing proofs, though mostly it makes
them more direct - some proofs involving recursive functions, e.g.,
@code{length[int](x) = length[nat](x)} require convoluted proofs.

@node Typepred Extension
@subsection Typepred Extension

The @code{typepred} prover command was extended to include functional
typepreds.  Thus if @code{f} has type @code{[D -> @{x: R | p(x)@}]}, then
the proof command @code{(typepred "f")} would generate a hypothesis of the
form @code{FORALL (x: D): p(f(x))}.  Note that some commands such as
@code{skolem}, take a flag that causes typepreds to be generated - this
would also include these functional typepreds.

@node TCC Ordering
@subsection TCC Ordering

TCCs that depended on conjunctive forms were generated in some cases in
reverse.  This has no bearing on soundness or correctness, but some
meta-analysis of PVS was made more difficult because of this, so it was
fixed.

@node Yices in 7.1
@subsection Yices

The yices prover commands have been fully integrated into PVS, and Yices
versions 1 and 2 are included in the distribution.

@node Theory Interpretations
@subsection Theory Interpretations

Theory interpretations have been improved in a few ways.  First, if an
uninterpreted type or constant has declaration formals, they must be
included in the mapping, e.g.,
@example
eq [A:TYPE+]: [A -> [A -> bool]]

logic_sttfa_pvs : THEORY = logic_sttfa {{
    connectives_sttfa_th := connectives_sttfa_pvs,
    eq[T:TYPE+](x:T)(y:T) := x=y
  }}
@end example

Second, the context is updated with the theory without mappings when
typechecking the RHS.  This means that it is not necessary to have two
importings in order to specify the RHS, and gives access to declarations
of that context that are not being interpreted.

@node    7.1 Incompatibilities
@section Incompatibilities

There are three primary sources of incompatibilities with this release.
This first is due to more rigorous checking of arguments in proof
commands.  In the past, if there were left over arguments after pairing
command arguments with their invocation, they were simply ignored.  Now an
error is invoked.  Generally these are easy to debug, and they usually
indicate a programming error to begin with.

TCC ordering can affect formula numbering (e.g. @code{foo_TCC1} and
@code{foo_TCC2} could be swapped, and within a proof, the branches may be
swapped.  In the regression tests, this was fairly rare.

The addition of more typepred information in proofs leads to additional
hypotheses, and this can cause formula numbers to be shifted.

In the past, the typechecker was a little strict in creating new variables
when a formula change was made (e.g., expanding a definition).  It tends
to keep the existing variable name more often.  Occasionally, this means a
reference to, e.g., ``i_1'' should be changed to ``i''.
